What is version control?

Version control systems are a category of software tools
that help a software team manage changes to source code over time.
Version control software keeps track of every modification to the code
in a special kind of database. If a mistake is made, developers can turn
back the clock and compare earlier versions of the code to help fix the
mistake while minimizing disruption to all team members.

For almost all software projects, the source code is like the
crown jewels - a precious asset whose value must be protected.
For most software teams, the source code is a repository of the
invaluable knowledge and understanding about the problem domain
that the developers have collected and refined through careful effort.
Version control protects source code from both catastrophe and the
casual degradation of human error and unintended consequences.

Software developers working in teams are continually writing new
source code and changing existing source code. The code for a project,
app or software component is typically organized in a folder structure
or "file tree". One developer on the team may be working on a new feature
while another developer fixes an unrelated bug by changing code,
each developer may make their changes in several parts of the file tree.

Version control helps teams solve these kinds of problems,
tracking every individual change by each contributor and helping prevent
concurrent work from conflicting. Changes made in one part of the software
can be incompatible with those made by another developer working at the same time.
This problem should be discovered and solved in an orderly manner without blocking
the work of the rest of the team. Further, in all software development,
any change can introduce new bugs on its own and new software can't be
trusted until it's tested. So testing and development proceed together
until a new version is ready.

Good version control software supports a developer's preferred workflow
without imposing one particular way of working. Ideally it also works
on any platform, rather than dictate what operating system or tool
chain developers must use. Great version control systems facilitate
a smooth and continuous flow of changes to the code rather than the
frustrating and clumsy mechanism of file locking - giving the green
light to one developer at the expense of blocking the progress of others.

Software teams that do not use any form of version control often run into problems
like not knowing which changes that have been made are available to users or the
creation of incompatible changes between two unrelated pieces of work that must
then be painstakingly untangled and reworked. If you're a developer who has never
used version control you may have added versions to your files, perhaps with suffixes
like "final" or "latest" and then had to later deal with a new final version.
Perhaps you've commented out code blocks because you want to disable certain
functionality without deleting the code, fearing that there may be a use for it later.
Version control is a way out of these problems.

Version control software is an essential part of the every-day of the modern
software team's professional practices. Individual software developers who are
accustomed to working with a capable version control system in their teams typically
recognize the incredible value version control also gives them even on small solo projects.
Once accustomed to the powerful benefits of version control systems, many developers
wouldn't consider working without it even for non-software projects.