Benefits of version control systems

Developing software without using version control is risky, like not having backups.
Version control can also enable developers to move faster and it allows software teams
to preserve efficiency and agility as the team scales to include more developers.

Version Control Systems (VCS) have seen great improvements over the past few decades
and some are better than others. VCS are sometimes known as SCM (Source Code Management)
tools or RCS (Revision Control System). One of the most popular VCS tools in use today
is called Git. Git is a Distributed VCS, a category known as DVCS, more on that later.
Like many of the most popular VCS systems available today, Git is free and open source.
Regardless of what they are called, or which system is used, the primary benefits
you should expect from version control are as follows.

1. A complete long-term change history of every file.
   This means every change made by many individuals over the years.
   Changes include the creation and deletion of files as well as edits to their contents.
   Different VCS tools differ on how well they handle renaming and moving of files.
   This history should also include the author, date and written notes on the purpose
   of each change. Having the complete history enables going back to previous versions
   to help in root cause analysis for bugs and it is crucial when needing to fix problems
   in older versions of software. If the software is being actively worked on,
   almost everything can be considered an "older version" of the software.

2. Branching and merging. Having team members work concurrently is a no-brainer,
   but even individuals working on their own can benefit from the ability to work
   on independent streams of changes. Creating a "branch" in VCS tools keeps multiple
   streams of work independent of each other while also providing the facility to
   merge that work back together, enabling developers to verify that the changes on
   each branch do not conflict. Many software teams adopt a practice of branching for
   each feature or perhaps branching for each release, or both. There are many
   workflows that teams can choose from when they decide how to make use of branching
   and merging facilities in VCS.

3. Traceability. Being able to trace each change made to the software and connect
   it to project management and bug tracking software such as Jira, and being able
   to annotate each change with a message describing the purpose and intent of the
   change can help not only with root cause analysis and other forensics. Having the
   annotated history of the code at your fingertips when you are reading the code,
   trying to understand what it is doing and why it is so designed can enable developers
   to make correct and harmonious changes that are in accord with the intended long-term
   design of the system. This can be especially important for working effectively with
   legacy code and is crucial in enabling developers to estimate future work with any accuracy.

While it is possible to develop software without using any version control,
doing so subjects the project to a huge risk that no professional team would be
advised to accept. So the question is not whether to use version control
but which version control system to use.